docs/docker_images.md, before:

## Boileroom Docker images

### What exists today
- **base**: `boileroom/boileroom/images/Dockerfile` → CUDA-enabled micromamba base with Python 3.12. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base`.
- **boltz**: `boileroom/boileroom/models/boltz/Dockerfile` → copies `environment.yml` and installs the Boltz env. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-boltz`.
- **chai1**: `boileroom/boileroom/models/chai/Dockerfile` → copies `environment.yml`, installs chai-specific deps, sets HF env vars. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1`.
- **esm**: `boileroom/boileroom/models/esm/Dockerfile` → copies `environment.yml` shared by esm2/esmfold. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-esm`.

> 🚨 Warning
> Modal and Docker/Apptainer currently use different images. This will be unified in a future pass. Until then, avoid mixing tags across runners and verify which image your runtime expects.

### 🚀 Quick start (dev)
Use the Python helper to build all images (base + models) with a single global worker limit.

```bash
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --platform=linux/amd64 --all-cuda --tag=dev --push --max-workers=5

# Optional flags
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --no-cache ...
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --tag=myfeature ...
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --tag=latest --push ...
```

You can still use the Bash helper as a simpler, serial alternative:
```bash
chmod +x scripts/images/build_model_images.sh
scripts/images/build_model_images.sh --platform=linux/amd64
```

Both helpers replace the older `build_all_*` helpers while preserving the same build order.

### ✅ Import smoke tests
Run the lightweight smoke script to ensure each image can import its expected modules:

```bash
chmod +x scripts/images/check_model_imports.sh
scripts/images/check_model_imports.sh --tag=dev        # verify local dev builds
scripts/images/check_model_imports.sh --tag=latest --pull  # verify tags published to Docker Hub
```

The GitHub Actions workflow (`.github/workflows/build-docker-images.yml`) executes the same script after building and pushing `:latest` and versioned tags, so a missing dependency will fail CI before images are published.

### 🛠️ Manual local builds
- Build base:
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/images/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/images
```

- Build boltz (using the dev base tag):
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-boltz:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/boltz/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/boltz
```

- Build chai1:
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/chai/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/chai
```

- Build esm:
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-esm:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/esm/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/esm
```

### ☁️ Push local tags to Docker Hub
Use the helper script with `--push` to push all images after building. Authenticate first:
```bash
docker login
scripts/images/build_model_images.sh --tag=dev --push
```
The script will push `boileroom-base`, `boileroom-boltz`, `boileroom-chai1`, and `boileroom-esm` using the selected tag.

### 📦 CI publishing (production)
GitHub Actions at `.github/workflows/build-docker-images.yml` now drives the release pipeline:
- Triggers automatically on pushes to `main` and can also be run manually via **Run workflow**.
- Runs the same helper script twice with Docker Buildx: once tagging everything as `:latest`, once tagging with the current `project.version` from `pyproject.toml`.
- Each invocation uses `--push`, so the base and per-model images land on Docker Hub at `docker.io/jakublala/<image>:latest` and `docker.io/jakublala/<image>:<version>`.
- Future merges inherit the cache layers thanks to BuildKit, keeping CI times reasonable.

### 🧱 Convert Docker images to Apptainer (SIF)
If your cluster uses Apptainer/Singularity for job execution, you can convert the Docker images to a `.sif` image in two common ways:

1) Directly from the registry (simplest):
```bash
# Public images (CI publishes :latest)
apptainer pull base.sif  docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:latest
apptainer pull chai1.sif docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:latest

# If the repository is private, authenticate first to Docker Hub:
# This will prompt for your Docker Hub credentials if needed.
apptainer remote login docker://docker.io
apptainer pull base.sif  docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:latest
apptainer pull chai1.sif docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:latest
```

2) From a local Docker image (no registry pull on the cluster) (🚨 **THIS HAS NOT BEEN TESTED, AND IS NOT RECOMMENDED** 🚨):
```bash
# On a build machine (e.g., your workstation):
docker pull docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev
docker save --format oci-archive -o chai1-oci.tar docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev

# Transfer chai1-oci.tar to the cluster, then:
apptainer build chai1.sif oci-archive://chai1-oci.tar
```

Either approach yields an Apptainer image `chai1.sif` that you can run with:
```bash
apptainer exec chai1.sif python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"
```

### 📂 Configure model storage location (MODEL_DIR)
Set `MODEL_DIR` at runtime to the host-mounted path that should store model weights. The runtime will also set `CHAI_DOWNLOADS_DIR=$MODEL_DIR/chai1` automatically when `MODEL_DIR` is defined.

Docker example:
```bash
# Store models on host at /data/models and expose to the container
docker run --rm \
  -e MODEL_DIR=/data/models \
  -v /data/models:/data/models \
  docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev python -c "import os; print(os.getenv('MODEL_DIR'))"
```

Apptainer examples:
```bash
# Option 1: keep default /mnt/models by binding a host dir there
apptainer exec -B /scratch/weights:/mnt/models chai1.sif python -c "import os; print(os.getenv('MODEL_DIR'))"

# Option 2: redirect MODEL_DIR anywhere and bind the same path
apptainer exec --env MODEL_DIR=/scratch/weights -B /scratch/weights:/scratch/weights \
  chai1.sif python -c "import os; print(os.getenv('MODEL_DIR'))"
```

### 🧩 Add your own image
1) Create a `Dockerfile` under `boileroom/boileroom/models/<your_image>/Dockerfile` that starts FROM the dev base locally:
```Dockerfile
ARG BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev
FROM ${BASE_IMAGE}
```
2) Build it locally (adjust path and tag):
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/<your_image>:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/<your_image>/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/<your_image>
```
3) Optionally wire it into the dev helper script (`build_all_docker.sh`) after `base` in the correct order.
4) For CI, extend `.github/workflows/build-docker-images.yml` or the helper script to include your image so it is built and tagged alongside the others.

### 💡 Tips
- Keep network-heavy `pip install` steps in as few layers as possible to improve caching.
- Use `--platform linux/amd64` locally to match CI.
- Prefer digest pinning in CI; use dev tags locally.

Commit message:

feat: enhance model directory handling and environment variable management
- Improved the Apptainer backend to automatically derive model-specific directories under MODEL_DIR, simplifying the setup for model data.
- Introduced safe_mkdir utility to ensure directory creation without issues in containerized environments.
- Updated environment variable handling to derive CHAI_DOWNLOADS_DIR from MODEL_DIR, enhancing flexibility and usability.
- Refactored various model classes to utilize safe_mkdir for cache directory creation, ensuring compatibility with bind-mounted paths.
- Enhanced documentation to clarify the automatic derivation of model-specific directories.

docs/docker_images.md, after:

## Boileroom Docker images

### What exists today
- **base**: `boileroom/boileroom/images/Dockerfile` → CUDA-enabled micromamba base with Python 3.12. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base`.
- **boltz**: `boileroom/boileroom/models/boltz/Dockerfile` → copies `environment.yml` and installs the Boltz env. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-boltz`.
- **chai1**: `boileroom/boileroom/models/chai/Dockerfile` → copies `environment.yml`, installs chai-specific deps, sets HF env vars. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1`.
- **esm**: `boileroom/boileroom/models/esm/Dockerfile` → copies `environment.yml` shared by esm2/esmfold. Tag: `docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-esm`.

> 🚨 Warning
> Modal and Docker/Apptainer currently use different images. This will be unified in a future pass. Until then, avoid mixing tags across runners and verify which image your runtime expects.

### 🚀 Quick start (dev)
Use the Python helper to build all images (base + models) with a single global worker limit.

```bash
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --platform=linux/amd64 --all-cuda --tag=dev --push --max-workers=5

# Optional flags
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --no-cache ...
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --tag=myfeature ...
uv run python scripts/images/build_model_images.py --tag=latest --push ...
```

You can still use the Bash helper as a simpler, serial alternative:
```bash
chmod +x scripts/images/build_model_images.sh
scripts/images/build_model_images.sh --platform=linux/amd64
```

Both helpers replace the older `build_all_*` helpers while preserving the same build order.

### ✅ Import smoke tests
Run the lightweight smoke script to ensure each image can import its expected modules:

```bash
chmod +x scripts/images/check_model_imports.sh
scripts/images/check_model_imports.sh --tag=dev        # verify local dev builds
scripts/images/check_model_imports.sh --tag=latest --pull  # verify tags published to Docker Hub
```

The GitHub Actions workflow (`.github/workflows/build-docker-images.yml`) executes the same script after building and pushing `:latest` and versioned tags, so a missing dependency will fail CI before images are published.

### 🛠️ Manual local builds
- Build base:
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/images/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/images
```

- Build boltz (using the dev base tag):
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-boltz:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/boltz/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/boltz
```

- Build chai1:
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/chai/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/chai
```

- Build esm:
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-esm:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/esm/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/esm
```

### ☁️ Push local tags to Docker Hub
Use the helper script with `--push` to push all images after building. Authenticate first:
```bash
docker login
scripts/images/build_model_images.sh --tag=dev --push
```
The script will push `boileroom-base`, `boileroom-boltz`, `boileroom-chai1`, and `boileroom-esm` using the selected tag.

### 📦 CI publishing (production)
GitHub Actions at `.github/workflows/build-docker-images.yml` now drives the release pipeline:
- Triggers automatically on pushes to `main` and can also be run manually via **Run workflow**.
- Runs the same helper script twice with Docker Buildx: once tagging everything as `:latest`, once tagging with the current `project.version` from `pyproject.toml`.
- Each invocation uses `--push`, so the base and per-model images land on Docker Hub at `docker.io/jakublala/<image>:latest` and `docker.io/jakublala/<image>:<version>`.
- Future merges inherit the cache layers thanks to BuildKit, keeping CI times reasonable.

### 🧱 Convert Docker images to Apptainer (SIF)
If your cluster uses Apptainer/Singularity for job execution, you can convert the Docker images to a `.sif` image in two common ways:

1) Directly from the registry (simplest):
```bash
# Public images (CI publishes :latest)
apptainer pull base.sif  docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:latest
apptainer pull chai1.sif docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:latest

# If the repository is private, authenticate first to Docker Hub:
# This will prompt for your Docker Hub credentials if needed.
apptainer remote login docker://docker.io
apptainer pull base.sif  docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:latest
apptainer pull chai1.sif docker://docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:latest
```

2) From a local Docker image (no registry pull on the cluster) (🚨 **THIS HAS NOT BEEN TESTED, AND IS NOT RECOMMENDED** 🚨):
```bash
# On a build machine (e.g., your workstation):
docker pull docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev
docker save --format oci-archive -o chai1-oci.tar docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev

# Transfer chai1-oci.tar to the cluster, then:
apptainer build chai1.sif oci-archive://chai1-oci.tar
```

Either approach yields an Apptainer image `chai1.sif` that you can run with:
```bash
apptainer exec chai1.sif python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"
```

### 📂 Configure model storage location (MODEL_DIR)
Set `MODEL_DIR` at runtime to the host-mounted path that should store model weights. Model-specific directories are automatically derived under `MODEL_DIR` (e.g., `MODEL_DIR/chai` for Chai, `MODEL_DIR/boltz` for Boltz). The runtime automatically sets `CHAI_DOWNLOADS_DIR=$MODEL_DIR/chai` when `MODEL_DIR` is defined.

Docker example:
```bash
# Store models on host at /data/models and expose to the container
docker run --rm \
  -e MODEL_DIR=/data/models \
  -v /data/models:/data/models \
  docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-chai1:dev python -c "import os; print(os.getenv('MODEL_DIR'))"
```

Apptainer examples:
```bash
# Option 1: keep default /mnt/models by binding a host dir there
apptainer exec -B /scratch/weights:/mnt/models chai1.sif python -c "import os; print(os.getenv('MODEL_DIR'))"

# Option 2: redirect MODEL_DIR anywhere and bind the same path
apptainer exec --env MODEL_DIR=/scratch/weights -B /scratch/weights:/scratch/weights \
  chai1.sif python -c "import os; print(os.getenv('MODEL_DIR'))"
```

### 🧩 Add your own image
1) Create a `Dockerfile` under `boileroom/boileroom/models/<your_image>/Dockerfile` that starts FROM the dev base locally:
```Dockerfile
ARG BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev
FROM ${BASE_IMAGE}
```
2) Build it locally (adjust path and tag):
```bash
docker build \
  --platform linux/amd64 \
  --build-arg BASE_IMAGE=docker.io/jakublala/boileroom-base:dev \
  -t docker.io/jakublala/<your_image>:dev \
  -f boileroom/boileroom/models/<your_image>/Dockerfile \
  boileroom/boileroom/models/<your_image>
```
3) Optionally wire it into the dev helper script (`build_all_docker.sh`) after `base` in the correct order.
4) For CI, extend `.github/workflows/build-docker-images.yml` or the helper script to include your image so it is built and tagged alongside the others.

### 💡 Tips
- Keep network-heavy `pip install` steps in as few layers as possible to improve caching.
- Use `--platform linux/amd64` locally to match CI.
- Prefer digest pinning in CI; use dev tags locally.
